## KEY TO THE CONVENTIONS OF THE DICTIONARY

#### Abbreviations

For a list of abbreviations used in the Dictionary, see p. lxvi.
Abbreviations may be entered in the Dictionary either as *main words*:

> **ABTA, Abta** ('æbtə). [Acronym f. the initial letters of the association.] The Association of British Travel Agents, established in 1950.
> **1950** *Travel Topics* Nov. 64/1 We can even hope that one day..membership of the A.B.T.A. will be accepted as sufficient evidence by the operating companies. **1963** *Times* 11 Jan. 6/5 The council of the Abta (the Association of British Travel Agents) in effect warned its members not to sell the scheme to the public, on the grounds that it contravened the association’s code of conduct. **1981** *Economist* 24 Jan. 78/3 Competing operators argue that the customer gets less protection, since Travel Bazaar’s four shops do not belong to the Association of British Travel Agents (Abta). **1984** *Daily Tel.* 12 Mar. 3/3 ABTA..is asking members to point out the dangers to tourists.

or in the final section of the entry for the corresponding *initial letter*, as at **A III**:

> **ASL**, American Sign Language; **A.S.M.**, air-to-surface missile; **A.S.M.**, assistant stage-manager; **A/S.R.S.**, Air-Sea Rescue Service; **A.S.T.M.S.** (also with pronunc. 'æstəmz), Association of Scientific, Technical, and Managerial Staffs; **A.S.V.**, air(craft) to surface vessel; **A.T.A.**, Air Transport Auxiliary;

#### Alphabetical order

The alphabetical order of the main entries in the Dictionary is strictly *letter-by-letter*, i.e. ignoring capitalization, punctuation, and spaces between words:

> **Athoan**
> **athodyd**
> **at-hold**
> **Athole brose**
> **at home, at-home**
> **-athon**

Note that headwords in which a final letter is *bracketed* with an opening bracket only appear where they would if the letter(s) after the bracket were not there:

> **air**

> **air(e**

> **airable**

whereas those with both opening and closing brackets appear where they would if the brackets were not present:
> **amarant(h)ine**
> **amarant(h)oid**
> **amarantite**

Where two words are identical in spelling, they are differentiated by *part of speech*:
> **aid** (eɪd), *v.*
> **aid** (eɪd), *sb.*

If two words of the same part of speech have distinct etymologies, they are differentiated by *superior numbers*:
> **†aire**, *sb.*¹ *Obs.*; also 6 aare. [a. OFr. *aire*:—L. *āra* altar.] An altar.
> **†aire**, *sb.*² *Obs*. Forms: 4 air, 5 eyre, 7 ayre, 4–7 aire. [a. OFr. *aire*: see AERIE.] The earlier equivalent of AERIE.

#### Combinations

Combinations of words, and compound words, may be entered in their normal alphabetical sequence as main words:

**'air-ˌchamber.** [**AIR-** 7.]
**1. a.** Any chamber or cavity filled with air in an animal or plant, *esp.* those in a ‘chambered-shell.’
**1847** ANSTED *Anc. World* iii. 43 In the Nautilus..we find a large, powerful, and complicated shell, composed of a number of separate compartments or air-chambers. **1855** OWEN *Vertebr.* I. ii. (L.) These air-chambers between the outer table and the immediate covering of the brain.
**b.** A chamber filled with air in a boat, airship, etc., to provide or assist buoyancy.
**1881** W. D. HAY *300 Years Hence* vii. 133 In the upper part [of the boat] was the entrance and air-chamber. **1882** *Encycl. Brit.* XIV. 570/2 The buoyancy of the institution’s lifeboat..is secured chiefly by means of a watertight deck..and two large air-chambers, one in the bow, the other in the stern. **1908** H. G. WELLS *War in Air* viii. § 1 The airship was remarkably simple to construct: given the air-chamber material, the engines, [etc.]..it was really not more complicated..than an ordinary wooden boat had been..before.
**2.** In a pump or other hydraulic machine, a receptacle containing air, the elasticity of which, when condensed, maintains a constant pressure upon the water; an air-vessel.
**1873** ATKINSON *tr. Ganot’s Physics* § 206 The fire engine is a force pump in which a steady jet is obtained by the aid of an air-chamber.

**'air-ˌchambered,** *a.* [f. prec. + -ED.] Furnished with air-chambers.
**1856** KANE *Arct. Explor.* I. v. 49 It [boat] was air-chambered and buoyant.

If they are less complex, they are normally entered in the concluding section of the entry for the *first word*, as at AID:

**8.** *Comb. and attrib.*, chiefly in sense 7, as **aid-band**, **-cohort**, **-force**, **-soldier**; or in sense 5, as **aid-money**: (all *obs.*). Also **aid-major** *obs.* an adjutant; **aid-post**, a post at which wounded soldiers receive first medical attention; **aid-prayer** in *Law*: see 2.

or under the *combining form* which is their first element, as at AERO-:

**ˌaerothera'peutics** (*Syd. Soc. Lex.*, 1881), **-'therapy** = PNEUMATOTHERAPEUTICS; **ae'rotropism** *Bot.* [ad. G. *aërotropismus* (H. Molisch 1885, in *Wiener Akad. Sitzungsber.* XC. I. 137), f. Gr. *τροπή* turning (*τρέπειν* to turn): see -ISM], the property, exhibited *esp.* by the growing roots of plants, of bending or turning towards a source of air; hence **aero'tropic** *a.*

#### Cross-references

Cross-reference to another main word (or derivative) is made in small Roman capitals:

**'air-balloon.** [**AIR-** 7.] †**1.** = **BALLOON** *sb.¹* 3. *Obs.*
**1753** *Publ. Advertiser* 25 May, A cascade, and shower of fire, and grand air-balloons, were most magnificently displayed.
**2.** A globose bag filled with gas so as to ascend in the air: cf. **BALLOON** *sb.¹* 6.
**1783** [see **BALLOON** *sb.¹* 6]. **1783** *Morning Chron.* 8 Sept. 3/4 The first air-balloon he made was filled with fumous particles. **1784** JOHNSON *in Boswell* III. 626 On one day I, [etc.]

Where the entry referred to is for a proper noun, the cross-reference appears in small capitals with a full capital initial:

|| bengaline ('bɛngəli:n). [mod.F.; so called from similarity to the fabric mentioned under **BENGAL** 1.] A (French) name for poplin, a mixed fabric of silk and worsted.
**1884** *Pall Mall G.* 20 Sept. 4/1 Autumn Fashions, Bengaline (a superior substitute for Irish poplin).

Cross-reference to a phrase or word combination in another entry is made in italic type:

**A.C.V.**, air-cushion vehicle (see *air-cushion* (b) s.v. **AIR** *sb.¹* **B. II**); **A.C.W.**, aircraftwoman; **A.D.C.**, aide-de-camp;

Some cross-references mix italic and small capitals; in these, the word in small capitals indicates the entry in which the phrase will be found:

|| **absurdum** (æb's3:dəm). [L. neuter of *absurdus* adj., used substantively as a scholastic term in med.L.] An absurd or illogical conclusion or condition. See **REDUCTIO** *ad absurdum*.
*a* **1834** LAMB *Spec. fr. Fuller* 537 *note*, Setting up an *absurdum* on purpose to hunt it down. **1877** KINGLAKE *Crimea* (ed. 6) I. xv. 342 Reducing the theory of Representative Government to the *absurdum*.

Cross-reference entries are entered in the same alphabetical sequence as other main words:

**absychitical**, erroneous form of **APSYCHICAL**.

**ahwene**, variant of **AWHENE** *v. Obs.*, to vex.

**ai, aie**, obs. forms of **AY, AYE**, and of **EGG**.

#### Derivatives

Derivatives of the main word may be treated as main words in their own right, or be placed in a section at the end of the entry for the word on which they are formed, introduced by ‘Hence’, ‘Also’, or ‘So’:

**aeronautic** (ˌeɪərəʊ'nɔ:tɪk, ˌɛərəʊ-), *a.* [f. prec. + -IC; cf. Gr. *ναυτικ-ός* pertaining to sailing.] Of or pertaining to aeronauts, or to aerial navigation; sailing the air.
**1784** *Hibernian Mag.* Sept. 489/2, I shall..attempt a description of his [*sc.* Richard Crosbie's] Aeronautic Chariot. **1826** MISS MITFORD *Our Village* Ser. II. (1863) 402 The announcement of the aeronautic expedition drew at least ten thousand gazers into the good town. **1876** M. COLLINS *Blacksm. & Scholar* I. viii. 197 The aeronautic art will not be perfected until the flight of birds is more carefully studied. **1878** *Daily News* 24 Oct. 6/4 The threads of the gossamer or aeronautic spider may be now seen. **1908** H. G. WELLS *War in Air* iv. § 1 The Emperor forgave him and placed him in control of the new aeronautic arm of the German forces. *Ibid.* xi. § 2 None of these countries had prepared for aeronautic warfare on the magnificent scale of the Germans. **1918** E. S. FARROW *Dict. Mil. Terms* 9 *Aëronautic Maps*, maps showing the contours and configuration of the land as closely as possible to the way it looks to the aviator from the air.
**Hence ˌaero'nautica** *sb. pl.* [mod.L., see **AERONAUTICS**], matters or facts of aeronautics.
**1753** [see **AERONAUTICS**]. **1838** T. M. MASON (*title*) Aeronautica. **1883** *Catal. Pat. Off. Libr.* II. 4 (*title*) Aëronautica Illustrata. A complete Cabinet of Aërial Ascents and Descents from the earliest period.

In some cases, the main word and derivative(s) are treated together:

**asynapsis** (æ-, eɪsɪ'næpsɪs). *Biol.* [f. A- *pref.* 14 + SYNAPSIS.] Absence of synapsis; failure of chromosomes to pair in meiosis. **Hence asy'naptic** *a.*
**1930** G. W. BEADLE *in Cornell Univ. Agr. Exp. Sta. Mem.* CXXIX. (*title*) Genetical and Cytological Studies of Mendelian Asynapsis in *Zea mays*. **1937** C. D. DARLINGTON *Rec. Adv. Cytol.* (ed. 2) vii. 291 In ‘asynaptic’ maize which has as a rule no pairing of chromosomes at meiosis, the progeny nevertheless show the results of normal crossing-over. **1949** DARLINGTON & MATHER *Elem. Genetics* v. 110 A so-called asynaptic gene often..produces a general reduction in the crossing-over of all the chromosome pairs when homozygous.

#### Division into senses

Large Roman capital letters are used principally for division of an entry into different parts of speech:

**annelid(e** ('ænəlɪd), *sb. and a. Zool.* [a. mod.Fr. *annélide*, f. as next: see **-ID**.]
**A.** *sb.* A member of the division of *Annelida*; a red-blooded worm.
**1834** SIR C. BELL *Hand* 263 These annelides can creep and turn in every direction. **1857** WOOD *Obj. Sea-shore* 94 The commonest of the terrestrial annelids is the earth-worm.
**B.** *adj.* Of or pertaining to the *Annelida*.
**1855** KINGSLEY *Glaucus* (1878) 113 Long Annelid worms of quaintest forms and colours. **1865** BRISTOW *Figuier's World bef. Del.* iv, [No] indications of life, except annelide-tracks, and burrows.

Large Roman capital numerals are used to indicate the ‘branches’ or main historical divisions of the sense development: see General Explanations, p. xxix. The distinct senses of a word are numbered **1**, **2**, **3**, etc.; each of these senses may be further subdivided **a**, **b**, **c**, etc., and a further subdivision (*a*), (*b*), (*c*), or (i), (ii), (iii), etc. is also possible: for further explanation, see p. xxxiii.

#### Etymology

The etymology and form history are introduced by *bold square brackets*. In the main entry, these are placed after the variant forms:

**annates** ('æneɪts, -əts). Also 6 annatys, 6–8 annats. [a. Fr. *annate* (15th c.), ad. med. and late L. *annāta* a year’s space, work, proceeds, the same word which in its primary sense became in Fr. *année*. See **-ATA**.]

Etymologies, or etymological information, may also occur in other places within an entry, still enclosed in square brackets:

airbrasive *a.* and *sb.* [**A)BRASIVE** *a.*] *Dentistry* (see quots.); air-break, (*a*) [**BREAK** *sb.¹* **5**] *Cricket*, a ‘twist’ or deviation in the air, of the ball when bowled; (*b*) [**BREAK** *sb.¹* **17 b**] *Electr. Engin.*, *attrib.* (see quot. 1910);